[{"title": "the-atg-approach-to-feet", "link": "https://kneesovertoesguy.medium.com//the-atg-approach-to-feet-2c2a46b60e2d", "text": "Kneesovertoesguy Follow -- Listen Share I\u2019m often asked about the ATG approach to feet. My mind jumps to 3 basics and 2 bonuses: Basics Bonuses Let\u2019s break this down\u2026 PRINCIPLE 1: We\u2019re operating on the theory that if enough ABILITY is present relative to the demand, the body will NOT break down. When you step backward you\u2019re fundamentally training the ABILITY of the foot because you\u2019re pushing through your toes on every step. Whether this is done by walking backward, sledding backward, or treadmilling backward (with sled turned off, or human-powered treadmill), it seems to get the job done in terms of foot warm-up. I had chronic foot pain that went away with no changes in my lifestyle other than stepping backward becoming a go-to exercise in my routine. And now from 13 years of coaching experience, I\u2019ve seen top results from using straight-leg AND bent-knee calf raises. In Knee Ability Zero this is represented by FHL and KOT Calf Raises. In weighted ATG programs, this is represented by single-leg standing and single-leg seated calf raises. PRINCIPLE 2: You can\u2019t be too strong from the ground up. Your upper body COULD be too heavy for your lower body. Your back COULD be too strong for your legs. Your legs COULD be too strong for your feet and ankles. But your feet and ankles CAN\u2019T be too strong for what\u2019s above! Stepping backward, straight-leg calf raises and bent-knee calf raises are a well-rounded approach for this. But there MAY be a missing link for some people\u2026 PRINCIPLE 3: Deviation from the body\u2019s natural design leads to more problems; restoring the body\u2019s natural design results in fewer problems. A common deviation in modern society is that the big toe has been jammed inward by dress shoes and sports shoes which point inward for style, even though the foot isn\u2019t naturally shaped like that. Millions of people now have deformed big toes that go inward. This would result in the muscles of the foot not functioning as intended, AND THERE ARE 29 MUSCLES ASSOCIATED WITH THE FOOT. But here\u2019s some good news for you\u2026 I am an example of someone who ended up with deformed feet due to decades in modern sports shoes. Simply by addressing the BASICS, I\u2019m totally symptom-free in my feet and lower legs. HOWEVER, I have spent the past few years in shoes that at least ALLOW my big toe to have space, and this may have assisted my progress. I even went so far as to make the first barefoot-inspired sneaker with two of my closest friends. We only have a few sizes available but thanks to your feedback, we\u2019re rapidly dialing in a Model 2. Model 1 is ideal for exercise and Model 2 will be ideal for competition. Most barefoot shoes have as little support as possible, since it\u2019s not natural for the foot to have support. HOWEVER, it\u2019s also not natural to be walking on concrete all day, so I believe a common-sense solution is to have SOME support, but no jammed-in big toe, and no excessively big heel cushion, both of which were developed for STYLE, with ZERO attention on health. If your big toe is extremely jammed in, you may even consider a spacer to straighten it out while you perform the above exercises. You\u2019ll feel your foot muscles engaging more. Until a few years ago, this would have seemed like a full approach, but it\u2019s not\u2026 PRINCIPLE 4: A body is only as bulletproof as it is strengthened against the outside world and BALANCED within ITSELF. Even after stepping backward AND calf training became part of my routine, I still had nasty shin pain when I tried to jump with maximum intent. The last 5 years have seen a worldwide shift in awareness and application of training the ANTERIOR TIBIALIS, thanks to ATG and YOU spreading the knowledge. This muscle is not only the primary decelerator of your foot \u2014 meaning it controls how much force slams into your foot to begin with \u2014 it also attaches all the way down to the inside of your foot! I assumed it was only up on the shin by the knee, but it actually takes a turn across the lower leg and goes quite far down. With Zero, free weights, and even full machines on the horizon, we have tibialis training mastered for broad use. Now you have some go-to moves for foot and lower ABILITY, plus some common-sense additions you may enjoy exploring. To be clear, this is not a program on the app, since these are already part of existing ATG programs. I spent the majority of this week writing about 11 steps for Back Ability Zero, which you can do at home with ZERO gym equipment. I\u2019ll be back in touch next week with a lengthy article, photos, and new form videos on the app, delivering a separate breakdown of Back Ability Zero vs. Back Ability Pro. Thank you so much for your support of ATG. Yours in Solutions, Ben ATG Online Coaching ATG Equipment ATG For Coaches Map of Coaches Barefoot-Inspired Sneaker"}, {"title": "the-anatomy-of-backward-walking", "link": "https://kneesovertoesguy.medium.com//the-anatomy-of-backward-walking-88ae8ad601de", "text": "Kneesovertoesguy Follow -- Listen Share \u201c100 steps backward are worth 1,000 steps forward.\u201d That\u2019s ancient Chinese wisdom, and from generation to generation walking backward has been passed on to prevent knee arthritis in the elderly. \u201cReverse out knee pain\u201d is a motto I\u2019ve used to help people exercise in reverse of their knee pain in order to reduce it. It got me off painkillers and has helped thousands of others do the same. A recent study explains the ANATOMY of why: You have a vastus \u201cmedialis\u201d and a vastus \u201clateralis.\u201d \u201cVastus\u201d means large, \u201cmedialis\u201d means toward the middle of the body, and \u201clateralis\u201d means toward the outside of the body. This illustration shows your vastus medialis on the left, and your vastus lateralis on the right: When people with knee pain walk forward, the vastus medialis does NOT engage like it does for someone without knee pain. For people with and without knee pain, the vastus lateralis seems to work the same. But when people with knee pain walk BACKWARD, that vastus medialis does engage as it\u2019s intended to! So you really CAN work your way backward to a more protected knee going forward. Muscles are just one part of the anatomy of knee pain, but now we can see why Knee Ability consistently helps people regain and/or improve forward activities such as hiking, running, and jumping. To round out this article, let\u2019s imagine a strenuous knee activity such as going downhill\u2026 The first muscle that experiences high pressure is the anterior tibialis. \u201cAnterior\u201d means front, and \u201ctibialis\u201d means of your tibia (your shinbone): So tibialis raises strengthen your FIRST line of defense before we even get to your knee: Then as your knee continues to travel forward, it winds up over your toes, with pressure on it: So backward walking plus tibialis raises form the first two steps of Knee Ability Zero because they are the literal reverse of pressure on your knees. This doesn\u2019t mean these two steps alone cover all the pressures and abilities of the knee, but they\u2019re easy to learn and they relate to the most FUNDAMENTAL pressures a knee needs to be able to handle in life. Multiple ATG members have recently reported breakthroughs from backward walking in a POOL, either for themselves or others. One was a man in his 70s, with knee replacement surgery scheduled. Thanks to backward walking in the pool, he progressed and canceled the surgery. He visited me at ATGHQ last week and was able to go forward with the sled and backward on the backward treadmill. Members can visit us whenever we train. Just message through the app to schedule: Mondays: Knee Ability Wednesdays: Back Ability Fridays: Shoulder Ability Another success involved a woman who helped her mom. Her mom is in her 80s and she\u2019d lost the ability to walk forward. Backward walking in the pool allowed her to rebuild the ability to walk forward! Look, life ain\u2019t perfect, but it could be better for a lot of people if they understood how backward relates to knee health. Thanks to our ATG group here, we\u2019re succeeding in the goal of spreading that knowledge. Thank you for your teamwork. Yours in Solutions, Ben ATG The Backward Treadmill ATG For Coaches"}, {"title": "how-the-whole-family-exercises", "link": "https://kneesovertoesguy.medium.com//how-the-whole-family-exercises-af7a572af797", "text": "Kneesovertoesguy Follow -- Listen Share Happy Father\u2019s Day! One of my family roles is helping everyone exercise. Seems like people know the benefits of exercise, yet many still don\u2019t consistently do it. My theory is that just about everyone will exercise if you provide them with the right options, which they\u2019ll do on their own without being pushed. So let\u2019s break down my own family, and maybe it\u2019ll give you some ideas for yours: My 2-year-old son enjoys hanging from the gymnastic bar I got him. We keep one in the living room and another at ATGHQ. He naturally hangs on it. I\u2019ll never have to make Onyx \u201cdo a workout.\u201d The \u201cworkout\u201d will always be available for him at a level he naturally enjoys. Meanwhile, Nana (my 69-year-old mother and our ultra-sharp, ultra-caring Head of ATG Customer Service) started doing chin-up holds on it while watching Onyx! So right from this simple gymnastic bar we can see that people will naturally exercise and could gain excellent ability IF the right option is present. What are the odds that Nana will drive to a gym to do chin ups? Next to zilch. But when the option is present and comfortable, she does it! On that note, she is VERY consistent with sledding \u2014 but not at the gym! She works from her home computer, so she prefers to take her personal-sized Torque sled outside, pushing it down her long, quiet street, and dragging it backward back to her house. On the other hand, Gramps doesn\u2019t work from the computer in an air-conditioned office. His job involves uncomfortable physical work \u2014 often in the Florida heat! So he\u2019s fallen in love with our Backward Treadmill because it\u2019s comfortable, smooth, and he can use it inside. I\u2019ve never seen him exercise this consistently! Both Nana and Gramps also do some ATG mobility exercises in their living room, which they\u2019ve turned into a \u201cmini ATG.\u201d My mom takes the ATG For Longevity program and treats it like a daily checklist, doing one exercise at a time throughout the day. My wife, Alissa, finds herself ultra-busy with our two kids (the other is 10 months old so\u2026 just mobility work so far for her!) and helping me run the business side of ATG, so she works HARD on the real metal sled on turf because it gets such huge benefits in little time. She then picks her favorite exercises from each day\u2019s ATG Basics workout, which is just Monday-Wednesday-Friday. When we\u2019re not in Florida (where our gym is), Alissa mostly enjoys Zero. As for me, I\u2019m thriving in the 3 days per week nature of ATG Basics. Normally I train in the morning, so now I spend Tuesday and Thursday mornings with my son! It\u2019s one of the best decisions I\u2019ve made. I also find myself EXTRA motivated for my workouts. I\u2019m finding even better results in my body from this approach! I hope this article makes your Father\u2019s Day even better! Yours in Solutions, Ben ATG Online Coaching ATG Equipment ATG For Coaches Barefoot-Inspired Sneaker"}, {"title": "the-new-back-ability-zero-program-part-1", "link": "https://kneesovertoesguy.medium.com//the-new-back-ability-zero-program-part-1-97ee129a658b", "text": "Kneesovertoesguy Follow -- 1 Listen Share It occurred to me this week that perhaps the WHY behind the lower back being such a common problem is because it\u2019s so central to the body. It shows us how much ELSE may be out. With a body exercised for ABILITY \u2014 in balance across its parts \u2014 the lower back won\u2019t have so many problems. That\u2019s the theory, anyway. Let\u2019s look at the first of 3 main sections of this philosophy. Each of these sections breaks up into 3 sub-sections, for a total of 9 lower back \u201copportunities.\u201d And good news: All 9 of these zones can be trained with ZERO equipment. Zone 1: The neck is way up above the lower back, but it\u2019s a common weak point in modern trainees. In fact, it can be shocking how weak the neck has become. I believe a neck should be able to support the body with its strength, as shown on the left side of the picture below. But as you can see on the right side, you could start right now with just a pad or towel. I could NOT do the bench version when I started: Standing closer to the wall makes it easier. Standing farther makes it harder. Perform 5 reps with a 5-second hold on each rep. To start, do only 1 set to ensure you don\u2019t have too much muscle soreness in the following days. Since some people have never exercised these muscles, the soreness can be quite surprising, almost like when you\u2019re new to strength training. Zone 2: As we move down from the neck \u2014 but still above the lower back itself \u2014 we find that the middle portion of the spine is too stiff in the average person. On the right, we have a beautiful way to do this from home, and on the left we have a more advanced gym version: For each version perform 5 reps with a 5-second stretch on each rep. The closer you stand to the wall, the easier it is, and the farther you stand, the harder it is. This exercise category not only stretches you out in a way that can provide back relief, it also makes you STRONGER in that position. This seems to create more mobility improvement over time. Interestingly, I recall researching a few years ago and finding two different studies, each supporting the back\u2019s ability to arch or round in relation to less lower back pain. In either case: more ABILITY = less pain! In our new Back Ability Zero program, we \u201csuperset\u201d (alternate back and forth) Zone 2 above, with the next exercise\u2026 Zone 3: Now we get into the muscles that control your mid-spine posture. These muscles are just above your lower back! This can be done from a chair, or from a back extension. For demonstration, I\u2019m using dumbbells, but you can absolutely start with no weight: Start with arms bent. Then press into the top position. Now slowly fight down for 5 seconds! Repeat for 5 total reps. Now go back to Zone 2, then again Zone 3, resulting in 2 sets of each. Let me know how you feel afterward. These are the first 3 of 9 zones which have consistently helped ATG members achieve less back pain and more back ABILITY. You can see the full formula on the app right next to Knee Ability Zero: Huge thanks to ATG Coaches Grace Borden, Brendan Backstrom, and Fernando Lopez for joining me at HQ this week just to focus on the back. Our work together helped lead to these breakthroughs in understanding the lower back. Grace runs our @womenofatg Instagram page. Fernando runs our ATG Shred Program and our Shoulder Ability Protocol. And Brendan runs our @atgequipment Instagram page and ATGequipment.com customer service. He\u2019s also worked hand in hand with me for over a year to gradually bring about Back Ability Zero. I\u2019ll return next week with Part 2. Yours in Solutions, Ben ATG Online Coaching ATG USA Equipment ATG For Coaches Barefoot-Inspired Sneaker"}, {"title": "atg-podcast-pain-free-ability", "link": "https://kneesovertoesguy.medium.com//atg-podcast-pain-free-ability-c5519067b09f", "text": "Kneesovertoesguy Follow -- Listen Share This is my first time hosting an interview-style podcast. You can click here for Spotify. And here for the YouTube version with visuals. I\u2019ll continue writing weekly articles, but because we put in a lot of work behind the scenes to make this a legit podcast for you, I wanted to let you know about it today. Here\u2019s our setup inside ATG HQ! This is what you see when you step inside the door: From left: Derek Williams, Fernando Lopez, me, and Kadour Ziani We got real wood tables made in Kansas, along with professional recording gear. Special thanks to Forrest, my childhood best friend who got me into basketball when I was 4 years old. Forrest did the first video of me 5 years ago when I became the \u201cKneesovertoesguy.\u201d We\u2019ve been working together ever since. Forrest orchestrated this podcast setup, with help from our close friend Drew, who does the extensive ATG editing \u2014 from app videos to YouTube videos. In our area of Florida, Drew is known as \u201cUncle Drew\u201d for his highlight film business, which has helped countless local athletes earn college scholarships! Drew has also been dedicated to mastering the ATG system for the past 3 years. The 3 of us work together on all the pictures and videos you see for ATG. Welcome to the Pain-Free Ability Podcast. We hope you enjoy it!"}, {"title": "how-to-upgrade-fitness-after-becoming-a-parent", "link": "https://kneesovertoesguy.medium.com//how-to-upgrade-fitness-after-becoming-a-parent-ea7070d05d96", "text": "Kneesovertoesguy Follow -- 2 Listen Share The following 5 points are not absolute rules. These are unusual things I\u2019ve done over the past few years to make my body more athletic and resilient while being more efficient than in my previous lifestyle: 1. Get 7\u20139 hours of uninterrupted sleep each night\u2026 HAH! Yea, right! The only thing that\u2019s worked for me is leaving my phone out of the bedroom. This means as soon as the kids are ready for bed, my phone goes OFF and doesn\u2019t turn back on till the morning. Shutting my phone off around 7 p.m. took discipline to get used to, but the mental freshness I get from the extra sleep has given me exponential returns in business effectiveness during the day. Less time on social. More energy to master my craft. More biz talk with wifey. More testosterone! 2. Backward! From my cardio to my strength training, I place great focus on training in REVERSE of the traumas of life\u2026 Backward walking has proven effective to prevent elderly folks from falling down stairs. Backward running in youth has increased their forward sprint times more than forward running did! Training the reverse of overused human actions and exercises seems to be a fountain of youth, and I apply this concept not just to my knees but also to my back and shoulders \u2014 all with affordable HOME equipment which makes this especially effective for me as a parent. Slowly progressing exercises like Reverse Step Ups with a wedge \u2014 from assisted to unassisted to loaded \u2014 now has me dunking a basketball in my 30s despite reaching my 20s having never grabbed the rim. 3. Training bodyweight strength \u2014 and not just push-ups and pull-ups. When tibialis raises and Nordic hamstring curls feel as easy as push-ups and pull-ups, you\u2019re moving toward world-class athleticism and resilience for your age! 4. Training strength THROUGH length. For my kids\u2019 sake, I feel like I need to be healthy 365 days a year, and nothing has delivered injury-proofing results for me like training my strength and flexibility in harmony. Kids are so flexible they rarely have non-contact injuries, but they\u2019re weak so the world around them is a consistent source of pain. As we age we lose BOTH flexibility and strength. Working on them in harmony may be one of the keys to preventing injuries, especially as we age. 5. Since Jan. 1, 2021, I haven\u2019t had any junk food. Maybe that would drive some people mad. I totally get it. I don\u2019t restrict what my wife and kids eat. It\u2019s a duty for me to set an example, and they end up eating more real food because of it. Prior to having kids, 80 days was the longest I went without any junk food. Now I\u2019m on Day 678, and I have so much more joy in my daily life because of my kids than I ever did from fake food. There\u2019s no doubt this has helped my fitness results, too. One Tip: I\u2019ve never had a problem eating healthy during the day, but once nighttime comes, so do the cravings. I handled this by keeping fresh, in-season fruit in the house. Maybe I shouldn\u2019t be having carbs and sugars at night, but swapping fruit for fake food was a win for me. Conclusion: All-in-all, I\u2019m spending less time and money while having the best all-around fitness of my life. I didn\u2019t expect better results to be even simpler, but that\u2019s been the case. I hope something from these 5 points is of use in improving your own life. The tools shown are at atgequipment.com, and the exercises are 4 of 28 areas I train in my Standards Program, which has the goal of no weak or tight links. Each area has a measurable target but also scales to virtually any starting level: atgonlinecoaching.com Yours in Solutions, Ben"}, {"title": "pain-free-ability", "link": "https://kneesovertoesguy.medium.com//pain-free-ability-50898ab0b950", "text": "Kneesovertoesguy Follow -- Listen Share All day long on social media, every day, 7 days a week, holidays\u2026 I am asked the same thing: \u201cI have XYZ condition. Can this\u2026?\u201d And I can relate because before my pain-free ability journey I would have asked the same thing about my own long list of knee conditions and surgical alterations. But the answer that has created thousands of success stories \u2014 not just for knees but also for ankles, hips, backs, shoulders, and more \u2014 is always the same: \u201cI do not address conditions. I only address your pain-free ABILITY.\u201d I have the lowest price there\u2019s ever been for perfect form coaching. If I thought this was fancy or exclusive data, it wouldn\u2019t be the cheapest. The data is VALUABLE because it puts YOU in the driver\u2019s seat. Here\u2019s the fundamental reason why: No research in the history of exercise and rehab has shown ABILITY in an area to be a bad thing! I will post that line 10 times just to be extra sure everyone understands that statement, given that I\u2019ve answered (by my estimation from the stats I keep) HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS of the same questions with the same answer\u2026 No research in the history of exercise and rehab has shown ABILITY in an area to be a bad thing! No research in the history of exercise and rehab has shown ABILITY in an area to be a bad thing! No research in the history of exercise and rehab has shown ABILITY in an area to be a bad thing! No research in the history of exercise and rehab has shown ABILITY in an area to be a bad thing! No research in the history of exercise and rehab has shown ABILITY in an area to be a bad thing! No research in the history of exercise and rehab has shown ABILITY in an area to be a bad thing! No research in the history of exercise and rehab has shown ABILITY in an area to be a bad thing! No research in the history of exercise and rehab has shown ABILITY in an area to be a bad thing! No research in the history of exercise and rehab has shown ABILITY in an area to be a bad thing! No research in the history of exercise and rehab has shown ABILITY in an area to be a bad thing! So then\u2026 My game is the ART of how to increase that ability WITHOUT PAIN in the process. We want the area to be able to do more, with less pain. So that\u2019s exactly what my job is. If I had a business card, it would read: Ben Patrick Pain-Free Ability Coach Let\u2019s take one example of this: Why is reverse sled the start of my Knee Ability Protocol? Why not a reverse step up? Well, if I loaded 100,000 pounds onto a Reverse Step Up I\u2019d die. But if I loaded 100,000 pounds onto a Reverse Sled it just wouldn\u2019t budge. I\u2019d be perfectly fine! Both exercises strengthen your knees over your toes. Both are great exercises! But one of them you can recover from faster. One of them more SAFELY gets the blood flowing! ON THE FLIP SIDE: The Reverse Sled is not as powerful to prevent injury as the Reverse Step Up! The Reverse Step Up loads the way down, aka the ECCENTRIC, which has more power to develop the muscles responsible for your knee as well as your knee tendons. Those tendons hold the muscles to the bone and are often the source of pain and injury. The Reverse Sled gets more circulation for healing. The Reverse Step Up gets more long-term adaptation for bulletproofing. Hence the sled is Step 1 and the step up is Step 2 in terms of direct knee ABILITY training. \u201cBut I don\u2019t have a sled!\u201d BOOM: My advice instantly involves Steps 1\u20133 of the Zero program \u2014 all of which are for muscles BELOW your knee \u2014 to gradually get that circulation going, and then studying Step 4, the Reverse Step Up, with EXTRA attention on regression. This means you have to start it: HOLDING SOMETHING TO ASSIST YOU, resulting in LESS than your own bodyweight! The two steps I have described so far, Reverse Sled and Reverse Step Ups (with Zero Steps 1\u20133 if no sled), have alone resulted in thousands of life-changing success stories. It didn\u2019t matter what the exact issue was. A knee has only so many things that can be wrong with it, and we WILL gradually address it from every key angle. But even after all of that\u2026 The human body will still eventually decay and die. You won\u2019t ever be free from physics. Life is a brutal game. But boy, is it a lot more fun when you\u2019re IN THE GAME instead of on the sideline. When you\u2019re NOT hooked on painkillers. When you\u2019re NOT lying on an operating table for more surgeries. When you ARE able to exercise your body and get a good sweating workout without pain coming along with that. When you ARE able to play your sport or do the physical activity you like to do\u2026 PAIN-FREE! These are gifts worth WORKING for, worth LEARNING for. The success stories in the pain/injury department are merely an awesome side effect, but the goal is increasing pain-free ability. Everything else is a bonus. Here are two wins I received this week. One was a short-term win (weeks/months of ability training), and the other a long-term win (years of ability training): [This next one was written below a video of him now doing the things he loves!] Pain-Free Ability training is just one tool in the system. I am just one piece of the system, doing my job. There ARE many other great systems, treatments, and supplements, but I believe I better serve the system by trying to master what I\u2019ve done most uniquely, and that\u2019s the subject of pain-free ability. Hence the name \u201cKneesovertoesguy.\u201d All these success stories would not exist without knees over toes. For years, knees over toes was unfairly deemed unsafe, when in reality the most unsafe thing is to lack UNDERSTANDING and ABILITY in that position! On the app I have all my full body programs, but this week I added my short-term Ability Protocols, too: -Knee -Hip -Back -Shoulder I believe in doing full body training, but I originally got myself off painkillers with just a knee protocol, so having these other protocols available stays true to my journey. Thank you for your support, and thanks to those of you who have taken the time to learn it well enough to help OTHERS. There\u2019s nothing I\u2019ve learned that you can\u2019t, too. Where you\u2019re most fragile now is where you may have the most potential to change your life, and the lives of others. Yours in Solutions, Ben atgonlinecoaching.com atgequipment.com atgforcoaches.com"}, {"title": "does-walking-backward-on-a-treadmill-work-for-knee-ability", "link": "https://kneesovertoesguy.medium.com//does-walking-backward-on-a-treadmill-work-for-knee-ability-95daab2e2051", "text": "Kneesovertoesguy Follow -- 1 Listen Share Yesterday someone showed me that a reporter was looking for someone to speak about \u201cwalking backwards on a treadmill for knee pain\u201d because of a \u201ctrend going around on social media that shows people walking backward on a treadmill\u2026 It not only works different muscle groups, but is said to help reduce knee pain.\u201d As the person who created this trend, I can answer these questions. So can physical therapists such as Brian Ziegler, who has written public articles on this subject, with research cited. When you step backward, your knee is over your toes. Knee over toes was found in 1978 to equal more pressure on the knee. This unfairly created a rumor to avoid that position, when in fact the research shows ABILITY in that position makes the knee more protected and less painful! But like anything, the DOSE has a lot to do with effectiveness, and walking backward is the lowest dose of knees over toes training. I also recommend dragging a sled backward, along with other exercises that scale to virtually any level. However, when gyms don\u2019t have sleds, I\u2019ve come up with all sorts of ways to mimic a sled. A treadmill not turned on (using your own strength to spin the belt) works GREAT \u2014 but might not be good for the treadmill. So I can only advise it if the owner of the treadmill approves. 5\u201310 minutes 3 times a week works great. The quadriceps muscles \u2014 and in particular the vastus medialis (the lower, teardrop-shaped of your 4 quad muscles) \u2014 have to work harder when the knee is over the toes, but there\u2019s more! This position also loads and strengthens your FEET, which don\u2019t get to work like that on the main weight room leg exercises: squats, deadlifts, leg presses, leg extensions, leg curls\u2026 all flat-footed! Therefore, for knees and for feet, backward walking or sledding would be a common-sense step for the longevity of any exercise regimen. It\u2019s the opening step of my programs, which have produced thousands of success stories. I\u2019ve now done over 200 miles of resisted backward walking, and I\u2019m glad for every single mile! I believe anyone has some degree of potential to \u201creverse aging\u201d by using this method. [My parents sledding backward!] Yours in Solutions, Ben ATG50 code: atgonlinecoaching.com ATG Equipment: atgequipment.com ATG Coaching Certification: atgforcoaches.com"}, {"title": "how-to-run-an-atg-group-class", "link": "https://kneesovertoesguy.medium.com//how-to-run-an-atg-group-class-6c3216b82014", "text": "Kneesovertoesguy Follow -- 2 Listen Share The power to help people is an amazing feeling, and this group class flow is one of the most helpful things in my arsenal. Having my own gym for 8 years gave me the freedom to think for myself while I worked to obtain bulletproofing results above the norm for myself and others. Here\u2019s the unusual class style that wound up being our winner for maximum in-person results\u2026 3 rounds minimum. 4 rounds maximum. This \u201cground up\u201d flow has many possibilities. Here\u2019s a classic example: This is the gentlest foundation I\u2019ve observed to reverse one\u2019s way off painkillers for the knees. An unexpected side benefit is reversal of foot degradation. The nature of pushing through the toes is the opposite of pounding through the heels. We are literally reversing how fast the body will decay by using this method. It also creates exceptional circulation to then dive into\u2026 [I believe my internal-resistance sled, which measures TIME and DISTANCE, will be key for group classes so your members know exactly what they did, and without having to take weights on and off sleds when members of different levels take turns. My prototype sled already exists but is in the next step, which is getting it made in America \u2014 and that\u2019s actively happening! It\u2019ll be the first-ever American-made internal-resistance sled.] 2. Tibialis Raise 20 reps This is amazing for group classes because it can be done with just a wall and strengthens one of the most common weak links due to lack of training. This muscle wraps FROM the foot up the shin and below the knee, reducing the negative effects of life\u2019s impacts while leading directly to\u2026 3. ATG Split Squat 8 reps per side This is perhaps the greatest \u201cstretch-strengthen\u201d exercise, flowing from your ankle mobility up to the most crucial muscle which stabilizes our knees \u2014 the VMO \u2014 while developing balanced strength between each side of the lower body and unlocking stiff hip-flexors in the process! Just about all modern humans have stiff hip-flexors. While I obsessed over the ATG Split Squat for its ability to rejuvenate my knees and boost my athleticism, I unexpectedly created a platform for a lower back that can function AS INTENDED. That\u2019s why right now is a perfect time for\u2026 4. Back Extension 10 reps This simple device got my dad\u2019s back out of the muck by putting his hands on the rails and GRADUALLY restoring range of motion and strength. Being weak and/or stiff is simply NOT an advantage for the human body. But neither is pushing yourself into painful positions. Meanwhile, I load this with a bar on my back to build lower back muscles above the norm. This is actually a common method among the LEAST injury-prone Olympic weightlifters in the world. It\u2019s like doing curls but to protect your spine, and they scale to any level. The trick is to go SLOW because your back won\u2019t know what you\u2019re trying to achieve if you just swing up and down with momentum. With these 4 steps alone, I\u2019d already be a happy man the rest of my life because I\u2019ve set up my body long-term for good posture and both athletic and protected joints and spine compared to the norm. But we can throw in one finishing touch before we start the circuit over\u2026 [American-made, pre-assembled, foldable back extension for sale soon, convenient for home or private gyms, particularly if running classes because you can move it around so easily to suit your flow.] 5. External Rotations 8 reps This is my foundational upper body exercise because the shoulders are the most injury-prone part of the upper body. Not surprisingly, they have the most range of motion of any joint in the body, and they handle so much of the upper body\u2019s demands. Yet it\u2019s not the pecs, the lats, the biceps, or the triceps that hold your shoulders together. It\u2019s 4 smaller muscles that actually have the primary job of keeping your shoulders\u2019 tendons (which hold muscles to bones) and ligaments (which hold bones to bones) from being strained against. Controlling 4 seconds down on each rep is a gamechanger, and if there\u2019s one upper body exercise I\u2019m stronger at than most men, it\u2019s this one. This has been my secret weapon to help people like baseball players when they think their career is over due to shoulder problems. You can see more of my favorites in \u201cATG Group Classes\u201d in the app \u2014 but if all I had was this workout, I\u2019d still be grateful because it would still make me more athletic and protected than the traditional training I did before it. Those who master these unique forms are producing the same life-changing results in others that I do, because there\u2019s nothing I\u2019ve learned that you can\u2019t too. THANK YOU for your boldness to learn an unusual system. THANK YOU for your support. Yours in Solutions, Ben For the lowest price in the industry for online perfect form coaching, with full access to all my programs: atgonlinecoaching.com (ATG50 code = 50% off first month, with no long-term contract!) To become certified as a coach yourself: atgforcoaches.com And for my equipment: atgequipment.com"}, {"title": "knees-over-toes-guy-q-a-whats-the-secret-to-kicking-power", "link": "https://kneesovertoesguy.medium.com//knees-over-toes-guy-q-a-whats-the-secret-to-kicking-power-2cd8950f25ff", "text": "Kneesovertoesguy Follow -- 1 Listen Share I made a basketball knee-jump transformation, so what the heck do I know about kicking? Well, I\u2019m closer to a kicking body than my original mentor, Charles Poliquin, was to a basketball body. He was 5\u20195\u201d and jacked, and he trained Olympic medalists in OVER 20 SPORTS, covering an array of body-types nothing like his, in sports he knew nothing about. Poliquin appears to have trained far more Olympic medalists than any strength coach ever because he could observe the movement of the sport, communicate with the coaches of that sport, and create solutions that no one within the sport ever had. His success was due to greater knowledge of how to create measurable strength adaptations. I have now enjoyed this same ability for my own clients. Here\u2019s an example of why\u2026 The clue in this case is that the #1 LIMITER of your desired athletic quality is the \u201ceccentric\u201d strength of the opposing quality. \u201cEccentric\u201d means when a muscle is lengthening. If you think of doing a bicep curl and curling the weight up, that is NOT the eccentric. The way down on a bicep curl is your eccentric strength. So in the case of a kick, what MOVES the ball? Your quads, big time. Your hip flexors also have to contract to move the ball. So does your tibialis. These muscles are all contracting when you kick. And a kick isn\u2019t truly one legged. Your other leg is planting into the ground, so your calves are under load and your hips are extending. If I were a soccer player, would I want to be elite in my quads, hip flexors, tibialis, calves, and hip extension? Yup! But none of those would unleash the \u201csecret\u201d to kicking power. They\u2019re only the obvious ones. The OPPOSITE of the kick is your eccentric knee flexion. Imagine you have no knee flexors (hamstrings) and you kick as hard as you can. You would severely hurt your knee because there would be nothing (other than your tendons* and ligaments**) to slow your shin bone from pulling itself free of the knee. Essentially, your body will only ALLOW you to kick as hard as your knee flexion can decelerate. (*tendons hold your muscles to the bone *ligaments hold your bones to other bones) THE 3 WAYS I COACH ECCENTRIC KNEE FLEXION #1: ECCENTRIC NORDIC The cheapest and simplest way is lowering yourself down in what is basically a bodyweight hamstring curl: The cheapest equipment I know for it is the NordStick. I\u2019m proud to say I\u2019m assisting the creator of the NordStick on an AMERICAN-MADE version with the industry-leading foam tech of the AbMat! I also have an American-made, commercial-grade Nordic Bench being developed that has the most comfortable padding yet, and is built slightly elevated (but not too high) to make a perfect bench for your free weight tibialis raises. I\u2019m on a simple mission to have ideal home and gym versions of every item needed for ATG \u2014 and all American-made. Currently, the Sorinex \u201cPoor Man Glute-Ham Raise\u201d has the best padding on the market. Sorinex can do amazing full gym build-outs and I can vouch for their Nordic Bench. I\u2019d personally call it the \u201cRich Man Glute-Ham Raise\u201d since I\u2019ve seen them first-hand in the home gyms of some of the richest athletes in the world! A regular Glute-Ham Raise machine is another awesome device which is covered in #3 of this article with video on the specific way I use it for eccentric training. It is more expensive, less accessible, and less strict of a measure than Nordics, per my extensive experience with both. That\u2019s why I personally use Nordics \u2014 not because I don\u2019t also love GHRs. For fullest understanding of how to regress and progress Nordics, my \u201cHow to Make Yourself a World-Class Athlete\u201d and \u201cHow to Nordic Hamstring Curl\u201d videos have the internet\u2019s most views for Nordic tutorials. #2: 2-UP/1-DOWN MACHINE HAMSTRING CURL Hamstring curl machines are common in gyms. Let\u2019s say you can do 8 reps with 100 pounds. Can you do 8 reps alternating legs (4 per side) with 75 pounds, using two legs to lift and controlling down at least 4 seconds with just one leg? Here\u2019s a video example. In ATG, we use the 2-up/1-down machine hamstring curl with a Structural Balance ratio of 75% of normal machine hamstring curl strength, for 8 reps. #3: ECCENTRIC-OVERLOAD GLUTE-HAM RAISE I\u2019ve never walked into a gym and seen this one, so it\u2019s better for most readers to watch it first. The idea is to use more weight than you can on a Glute-Ham Raise, but use the Back Extension function to get momentum. In fact, the Back Extension function of the Glute-Ham Raise is wonderful. If you had a Glute-Ham Raise and performed the Back Extension with a 2-second hold at the top of each rep, that would suffice for ATG program purposes. I use a 45-degree Back Extension because of the stretch at the bottom and because of how common they are in commercial gyms. Yep, I have one of those being American-made as well. It\u2019s the first home-intended foldable, pre-assembled back extension, PERIOD \u2014 not to mention American-made, and again will have industry-leading padding. So, how do I recommend you integrate this into your training? Well, Mondays for me (\u201cWhat Ben\u2019s Doing\u201d on the app) are \u201cSquats & Knee Flexion.\u201d On the squat I perform 5 warm-up sets and then 5 working sets. Starting with my first working sets of squats, I superset with knee flexion. So I perform 5 good quality sets of knee flexion on Mondays. I\u2019ve been using the NordStick for the past 16 weeks and it works for me. Imbalance #1: If you have a measurable difference between sides, the 2-up/1-down machine hamstring curl would be ideal for you. In this case I would perform 4 reps on the weak side and 3 on the strong just to get a little extra effort in to bring up the weak side. Keep in mind you\u2019re alternating legs, so you\u2019re NOT using more weight on the strong leg, and you would be extra careful not to let the weight drop any faster on the weak side. This allows you to catch up without going to extremes that could create imbalances the other way. Example: Machine Hamstring Curl 100 pounds x 8 reps 2-up/1-down Machine Hamstring Curl 70 pounds right leg, 50 pounds left leg. 2 years later: Machine Hamstring Curl 120 pounds x 8 reps 2-up/1-down Machine Hamstring Curl 90 pounds right leg, 90 pounds left leg. Imbalance #2: If you have a weak lower back (8-rep strict Back Extension less than 43% of 3-rep strict Front Squat per The ATG Calculator), the Eccentric-Overload Glute-Ham Raise is an ideal version for you since you\u2019ll be getting extra lower back strengthening compared to the Eccentric Nordic or 2-up/1-down Machine Hamstring Curl. FINAL WORDS Mindset: If you\u2019re in a kicking sport and you think your eccentric knee flexion strength is \u201cgood,\u201d I would encourage you to think of it like a powerlifter thinks of a bench press, because I can promise you NO ONE IS DOING THAT FOR ECCENTRIC KNEE FLEXION. I have talked with thousands of athletes now. If they are training eccentric knee flexion, it\u2019s maybe for 12 weeks out of the year, or doing some random drills \u2014 NOT on a weekly basis with measurable progress and full intent. Bonus: The more you increase your eccentric knee flexion strength, the more protected your knee gets, too! I hope this data helps your training and your ability to help others. Yours in Solutions, Ben PS. Special thanks to those doing my coaching certification. I was losing passion for writing articles until one of the members pointed out to me how much writing I do every day in answering their questions. So before using up my writing energy on a lengthy answer to this question, I noted it for an article so that it lives on and isn\u2019t lost in the abyss of The Pulse of ATG (our Telegram chat). Now I\u2019ll never run out of articles to bring you, and the member who asked this question will still get this lengthy answer. ATG ATG For Coaches ATG Equipment"}]